®USING THIS REFERENCE
This document is the definitive source for all Twilight Imperium:
Fourth Edition rules. Before using this document, players should read
and understand the rules presented in the Learn to Play booklet. As
questions arise during gameplay, players should refer to this reference.
This reference includes two main sections: advanced concepts and
the glossary. The advanced concepts section contains general rules
that players should learn after playing their first game, including the
complete setup rules.
The glossary provides players with detailed rules and clarifications
listed in alphabetical order by topic. Players are encouraged to use
the index on page 30 to find specific topics within the glossary.
ADVANCED CONCEPTS
GOLDEN RULES
The golden rules are fundamental game concepts on which all other
game rules are built.
• If information in this Rules Reference contradicts the Learn
to Play booklet, the Rules Reference takes precedence.
• If a card ability contradicts information in the Rules
Reference, the card takes precedence. If both the card and
the rules can be followed at the same time, they should be.
•
If a card or faction ability uses the word “cannot,” it is
absolute and cannot be overridden by other abilities.
TIMING
If there are multiple abilities that players wish to resolve at the same
time, each player takes a turn resolving an ability in initiative order.
After each player has taken a turn, players again have a turn to resolve
abilities in initiative order. This process repeats until all players have
resolved all of the abilities they wish to resolve at that time.
If there are multiple abilities that players wish to resolve at the
same time during the strategy phase, players take turns resolving
abilities starting with the speaker and proceeding clockwise.
For more information about timing and ability resolution, see
“Abilities” on page 4.
COMPLETE SETUP
This section describes how to set up a game using all of the
advanced rules. Note that some of these steps vary slightly from the
“First-Game Setup” rules.
STEP 1—DETERMINE SPEAKER: Randomly determine one player
to gain the speaker token; he is the speaker.
STEP 2­—CHOOSE FACTIONS: Each player chooses one faction
sheet; this is his faction for the game.
2
STEP 3—GATHER FACTION COMPONENTS: Each player takes
the following components that match his faction. Each player places
his faction sheet and all of his faction’s components in his play area.
Players return all unused faction components to the game box.
• 1 home system tile • 1 faction promissory note
• 17 control tokens • 2 faction technology cards
• 16 command tokens • faction-specific tokens
NOTE: Only the Naalu Collective, the Nekro Virus, and the Ghosts
of Creuss have faction-specific tokens.
STEP 4—CHOOSE COLOR: Each player chooses one color and takes
the following components corresponding to that color. Each player
places his plastic units and command sheet in his play area.
• 59 plastic units • 25 technology cards
• 1 command sheet • 4 promissory notes
Each player combines his color-specific and faction technology
cards into one technology deck and his color-specific and faction
promissory note cards into one promissory note deck. Then, he
places these decks in his play area.
STEP 5—DISTRIBUTE STARTING PLANET CARDS: Each player
takes the planet cards that correspond to the planets in his home
system and places them faceup in his play area.
STEP 6—CREATE GAME BOARD: Place the Mecatol Rex system
tile in the center of the common play area—this is the center of the
galaxy. The galaxy will consist of three rings around Mecatol Rex.
Each player’s home systems will be in a set position in the third ring.
Use the “Game Board Setup” diagram to estimate where players’
home systems will be placed based on each player’s position around
the game area. Then, create the game board following these steps:
SEPARATE SYSTEMS: Separate the system tiles into two
i.
piles using the color on the back of each tile: one pile of
blue-backed system tiles and one pile of red-backed system
tiles. Green-backed system tiles are home systems and are
not separated into piles in this way.
ii. DEAL SYSTEM TILES: Shuffle each pile of system tiles
facedown. Then, deal facedown system tiles to each player
according to player count:
• THREE-PLAYER: Six blue and two red tiles are dealt to
• FOUR-PLAYER: Five blue and three red tiles are dealt to
• FIVE-PLAYER: Four blue and two red tiles are dealt to each
• SIX-PLAYER: Three blue and two red tiles are dealt to each
each player.
each player.
player.
player.NOTE: For a five-player game, one additional system tile will be
needed. Before placing system tiles, the speaker draws one random
red-backed system tile and places it faceup in any space adjacent to
Mecatol Rex.
GAME BOARD SETUP
iii. PLACE SYSTEM TILES: First, players place their home
systems in the approximate positions where they will connect
to the galaxy. Then, starting with the speaker and proceeding
clockwise, each player places one system tile faceup in
the first ring around Mecatol Rex. After the last player has
placed his first tile, he places a second tile. Then, the order
of tile placement reverses and proceeds counterclockwise,
until it reaches the speaker again, who places two tiles. Then,
tile placement reverses again and proceeds clockwise. This
process repeats until players have placed all of their tiles.
+2
+4
+2
S ix -P layer S etup F ive -P layer S etup
F our -P layer S etup T hree -P layer S etup
Each ring around Mecatol Rex must be fully built before
any tile can be placed in the next ring. Anomaly system
tiles cannot be placed next to one another unless there
is no other option. Additionally, system tiles that contain
the same type of wormhole cannot be placed next to one
another unless there is no other option. After placing all of
the dealt system tiles, players attach their home systems to
the rest of the galaxy.
NOTE: During a five-player game, three players will be at a slight
disadvantage based on their home systems’ starting positions on the
game board. After creating the game board, those players receive
trade goods based on their positions. Use the diagram to the right to
determine how many trade goods each of those players receives.
STEP 7—PLACE CUSTODIANS TOKEN: Place the custodians
token in the center of the game board on Mecatol Rex.
STEP 8—SHUFFLE COMMON DECKS: Shuffle the action card,
the common play area for trade good tokens, fighter tokens, and
infantry tokens.
STEP 10—GATHER STRATEGY CARDS: Place each of the eight
strategy cards faceup in the common play area within reach of
the speaker.
STEP 11—GATHER STARTING COMPONENTS: Each player gains
the starting technologies and starting units listed on the back of his
faction sheet. Each player places the technology cards faceup near
his faction sheet and the starting units in his home system.
Each player places three command tokens in his tactic pool, three
command tokens in his fleet pool, and two command tokens in his
strategy pool.
R ing 1
H ome S ystem R ing 2
R ing 3
agenda, stage I objective, stage II objective, and secret objective
decks separately and place them in the common play area.
STEP 9—CREATE SUPPLY: Gather and create separate piles in
M ecatol R ex
STEP 12—PREPARE OBJECTIVES: Prepare objectives as follows:
i.
Each player draws two secret objectives and chooses one to
keep. Shuffle the unchosen secret objectives back into the
secret objective deck without revealing them.
ii. Place the victory point track near the game board. As a group,
players decide whether to play with the 10- or 14-space side
of the victory point track faceup. Each player places one of his
control tokens on the “0” space of the track.
iii. The speaker deals five facedown stage I objectives and
places them in a row below the victory point track. Then, he
deals five facedown stage II objectives and places them in a
row below the stage I objectives.
iv. The speaker reveals the first two stage I objectives.
3GLOSSARY
This glossary provides players with detailed rules for Twilight
Imperium: Fourth Edition, organized by topic. Players are
encouraged to use the index on pagepage 30 to find specific topics
within the glossary.
1
ABILITIES
1.11
1.12
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.10
If the timing of an ability uses the word “after,” the ability’s
effect occurs immediately after the described timing event.
•
1.13
Cards and faction sheets each have abilities that players can resolve
to trigger various game effects.
1.1
TIMING
If the timing of an ability uses the word “when,” the ability’s
effect occurs at the moment of the described timing event.
•
Each ability describes when and how a player can resolve it.
If a card has multiple abilities, each ability is presented as its
own paragraph. 1.14
If an ability contains the word “Action,” a player must use a
component action during the action phase to resolve that ability. 1.15
If an ability uses the word “cannot,” that effect is absolute.
When a player resolves an ability, he must resolve the ability
in its entirety. Any parts of the ability preceded by the word
“may” are optional, and the player resolving the ability may
choose not to resolve those parts.
Abilities on components that remain in play are mandatory
unless they use the word “may.”
If an ability has multiple effects separated by the word “and,” a
player must resolve as many of the ability’s effects as possible.
However, if he cannot resolve all of its effects, he is allowed to
resolve as many as he can.
1.16
1.17
1.18
1.19
Some abilities have a cost that is followed by an effect. The
cost of an ability is separated from the effect by the word “to”
or by a semicolon. A player cannot resolve the effect of such an
ability if he cannot resolve that ability’s cost.
Some examples of an ability’s cost include spending resources,
spending trade goods, spending command tokens, exhausting
cards, and activating specific systems.
1.20
1.21
1.22
1.23
Such an ability typically modifies or replaces the timing
event in some way.
Effects that occur “when” an event happens take priority over
effects that occur “after” an event happens.
If an ability uses the word “then,” a player must resolve the
effect that occurs before the word “then” before resolving
the effect that occurs after the word “then.”
Each ability can be resolved once for each occurrence of that
ability’s timing event. For example, if an ability is resolved
“At the start of combat,” it can be resolved at the start of each
combat.
COMPONENT-SPECIFIC RULES
The opening paragraph of each ability found on an action card
describes when a player can resolve that card’s ability.
The opening paragraph of most abilities found on promissory
notes describes when a player can resolve that card’s ability.
•
COSTS
For example, if an ability is resolved “after a ship is
destroyed,” the ability must be resolved as soon as the ship
is destroyed and not later during that turn or round.
Some promissory notes have abilities that trigger as soon as
a player receives the card.
Abilities on agenda cards correspond to an outcome. Players
resolve these abilities during the agenda phase after players
vote for a particular outcome.
Each faction has faction abilities presented on its faction sheet.
Each faction’s flagship has one or more unique abilities. Some
abilities provide players with perpetual effects.
Some units have unit abilities. These abilities are named and
presented above a unit’s attributes on a player’s faction sheet
or on a unit upgrade card. Each unit ability has unique rules for
when a player can resolve that ability. The following abilities
are unit abilities:
• Anti-Fighter Barrage • Production
• Bombardment • Space Cannon
• Planetary Shield • Sustain Damage
If a unit’s ability uses the phrase “this system” or “this planet,”
the ability is referring to the system or planet that contains that
unit.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Cards, Promissory Notes, Strategy Card,
Technology
42
ACTION CARDS
2.10
Action cards provide players with various abilities that they can
resolve as described on the cards.
INFILTRATE
When you gain control of a
planet:
Replace each PDS and space
dock that is on that planet
with a matching unit from
your reinforcements.
The 1X had scarcely interfaced with
the mainframe before it belonged
to them completely.
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
Each player draws one action card during each status phase.
2.6
The first paragraph of each action card is presented in bold
text and describes the timing of when that card’s ability can
be resolved.
•
2.8
2.9
3
If an action card contains the word “Action,” a player must
use a component action during the action phase to resolve
the ability. A player cannot resolve a component action if he
cannot completely resolve its ability.
Multiple action cards with the same name cannot be played
during a single timing window to affect the same units or
game mechanic.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
During a player’s turn, he may perform one of the following
three types of actions: a strategic action, a tactical action, or a
component action.
If a player cannot perform an action, he must pass.
After a player has passed, he cannot perform additional actions
during that action phase.
• A player that has passed can still resolve the secondary
ability of other players’ strategy cards.
• It is possible for a player to perform multiple, consecutive
actions during an action phase if all other players have
passed during that action phase.
A player cannot pass until he has performed a strategic action.
•
3.5
During a three-player or four-player game, a player cannot
pass until he has exhausted both of his strategy cards.
After all players have passed, play proceeds to the status phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Component Action, Game Round, Status Phase,
Strategic Action, Tactical Action
4
ACTIVE PLAYER
The active player is the player taking a turn during the action phase.
4.1
To play an action card, a player reads and resolves the card’s
ability text. Then, he discards the card, placing it in the action
discard pile. 4.2
If an action card is canceled, that card has no effect and is
discarded. 4.3
If there are multiple action cards that players wish to resolve at
the same time during the strategy or agenda phases, players
take turns resolving action cards starting with the speaker and
proceeding clockwise. This process repeats until each player
has resolved all the action cards that he wishes to resolve
during that window.
ACTION PHASE
During the action phase, each player takes a turn in initiative order.
During a player’s turn, he performs a single action. After each
player has taken a turn, player turns begin again in initiative order.
This process continues until all players have passed.
A game effect can increase or decrease the number of cards
a player can have in his hand.
A player’s action cards remain hidden from other players until
they are played.
•
2.7
Phase
Each player can have a maximum of seven action cards in his
hand at any time. If a player ever has more than seven action
cards, he must choose which seven cards he wishes to keep and
discard the rest.
•
2.5
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Component Action, Politics, Status
Players can draw action cards by resolving the primary and
secondary abilities of the “Politics” strategy card.
When a player draws an action card, he takes the top card from
the action card deck and adds it to his hand of action cards.
If there are multiple action cards that players wish to resolve
at the same time during the action phase, each player takes
a turn resolving one action card in initiative order, beginning
with the active player. This process repeats until each player
has resolved all the action cards that he wishes to resolve
during that window.
During the action phase, the player who is first in initiative
order is the first active player.
After the active player takes a turn, the next player in initiative
order becomes the active player.
After the last player in initiative order takes a turn, the player
who is first in initiative order becomes the active player again,
and turns begin again in initiative order, ignoring any players
who have already passed.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Initiative Order
55
ACTIVE SYSTEM
7.4
The active system is the system that is activated during a tactical action.
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
When a player performs a tactical action, he activates a system
by placing a command token from his tactic pool on that
system. That system is the active system.
A player cannot activate a system that already contains one of
his command tokens.
A player can activate a system that contains command tokens
that match other players’ factions.
A system remains the active system for the duration of the
tactical action during which it was activated.
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Tactical Action
6
ADJACENCY
Two system tiles are adjacent to each other if any of the tiles’ edges
are touching each another.
6.1
6.2
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8
If a law is discarded from play, that law’s ability is no longer
in effect. Place that card on the top of the agenda card discard
pile.
If an “Against” outcome of a law received the most votes,
players resolve the outcome and discard the agenda.
Directives provide one-time game effects.
When resolving a directive, players resolve the outcome that
received the most votes and discard the agenda card.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Phase, Attach, Victory Points
8
AGENDA PHASE
During the agenda phase, players can cast votes on agendas that can
change the rules of the game.
8.1
A system that has a wormhole is treated as being adjacent to a
system that has a matching wormhole.
A unit or planet is adjacent to all system tiles that are adjacent
to the system tile that contains that unit or planet.
If a law is in a player’s play area as opposed to the common
play area, that player owns that law.
8.2
Players skip the agenda phase during the early portion of each
game. After the custodians token is removed from Mecatol
Rex, the agenda phase is added to each game round. To resolve
the agenda phase, players perform the following steps:
STEP 1—FIRST AGENDA: Players resolve the first agenda by
following these steps in order:
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Neighbors, Wormholes
7
i. REVEAL AGENDA: The speaker draws one agenda card
from the top of the agenda deck and reads it aloud to
all players, including all of its possible outcomes.
AGENDA CARD
ii. VOTE: Each player, starting with the player to the left
Agenda cards represent galactic laws and policies. During each agenda
phase, players cast votes for specific outcomes on two agenda cards.
of the speaker and continuing clockwise, can cast votes
for an outcome of the current agenda.
iii. RESOLVE OUTCOME: Players tally each vote that was
COLONIAL
REDISTRIBUTION
cast and resolve the outcome that received the most
votes.
DIRECTIVE
Elect Non-Home Planet
Other Than Mecatol Rex
Destroy each unit on the
elected planet. Then, the
player who controls that
planet chooses 1 player with
the fewest victory points; that
player may place 1 infantry
from his reinforcements
on the elected planet.
7.1 There are two types of agenda cards: laws and directives.
7.2 Laws can permanently change the rules of the game.
7.3
6
When resolving a law, if a “For” outcome received the most
votes, or if the law requires an election, the law’s ability
becomes a permanent part of the game. Players resolve the
outcome and place the agenda card either in the common play
area or in a player’s play area, as dictated by the card.
8.3
STEP 2—SECOND AGENDA: Players repeat the “First
Agenda” step of this phase for a second agenda.
8.4
STEP 3—READY PLANETS: Each player readies each of his
exhausted planets. Then, a new game round begins starting
with the strategy phase.
8.5
VOTING
When voting during the agenda phase, a player can cast votes for a
specific outcome of an agenda.
8.6
To cast votes, a player exhausts any number of his planets. The
player casts a number of votes for an outcome of his choice equal
to the combined influence values of the planets he exhausted.
•
When a player exhausts a planet to cast votes, he must cast
the full amount of votes provided by that planet.8.7
8.8
8.9
8.10
A player cannot cast votes for multiple outcomes of the same
agenda. Each vote he casts must be for the same outcome.
Some agendas have “For” and “Against” outcomes. When a
player casts votes on such an agenda, he must cast his votes
either “For” or “Against.”
Some agendas instruct players to elect either a player or a planet.
When a player casts votes for such an agenda, he must cast his
vote for an eligible player or planet as described on the agenda.
A player may choose to abstain by not casting any votes.
8.18
8.19
8.20
8.21
8.22
9.3
There are four types of anomalies: asteroid fields, nebulae,
supernovas, and gravity rifts.
Each type of anomaly is identified by its art, as follows:
44
42
Asteroid Field
When casting votes, a player must declare aloud the outcome
for which his votes are being cast.
8.14
8.17
9.2
An anomaly is identified by a red border located on the tile’s
corners.
When resolving these agendas, the “elected planet” is the
planet that had the most votes cast for it.
Trade goods cannot be spent to cast votes.
8.16
9.1
When resolving these agendas, the “elected player” is the
player who had the most votes cast for him.
8.13
8.15
An anomaly is a system tile that has unique rules.
When electing a planet, a player must cast votes for a planet
that is controlled by a player.
•
8.12
ANOMALIES
When electing a player, a player can cast votes for himself.
•
8.11
9
43
Nebula
41
Supernova
Gravity Rift
Some game effects allow a player to cast additional votes for
an outcome. These votes cannot be cast for a different outcome
than other votes cast by that player. RELATED TOPICS: Asteroid Field, Gravity Rift, Movement,
If a player cannot vote on an agenda because of a game effect,
he cannot cast votes for that agenda by exhausting planets or
through any other game effect. 10
OUTCOMES
To resolve an outcome, the speaker follows the instructions on
the agenda card.
Nebula, Supernova, System Tiles
ANTI-FIGHTER BARRAGE (UNIT ABILITY)
A unit with the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability may be able to
destroy an opponent’s fighters at the start of the first round of a
space combat. During the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” step of space
combat, players perform the following steps:
10.1
STEP 1— Each player rolls dice for each of his units in the
combat that has the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability; this is called
an anti-fighter barrage roll. A hit is produced for each die roll that
is equal to or greater than the unit’s anti-fighter barrage value.
If there is a tie for the outcome that received the most votes, the
speaker decides which of the tied outcomes to resolve.
If an “Elect” or “For” outcome of a law was resolved, that card
remains in play and permanently affects the game. • If a unit has an “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability, it is
presented on its faction sheet and technology cards.
If a directive or an “against” outcome of a law was resolved,
that card is placed in the agenda discard pile. • The “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability is displayed as “Anti-
Fighter Barrage X (Y).” The X is the minimum value
needed for a die to produce a hit, and Y is the number of
dice rolled.
• Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat
rolls do not affect anti-fighter barrage rolls
Some game effects instruct a player to predict an outcome.
To predict an outcome, a player declares aloud the outcome
he thinks will receive the most votes. He must make this
prediction after the agenda is revealed but before any votes
have been cast.
10.2
STEP 2:— Each player must choose and destroy one of his
• A predicted outcome must be a possible outcome of the
revealed agenda. fighters in the active system for each hit his opponent’s anti-
fighter barrage roll produced.
• After resolving the outcome of the agenda, resolve any
abilities that were dependent upon predicting the outcome. •
RELATED TOPICS: Custodians Token, Game Round, Influence
If a player has to assign more hits than he has fighters in the
active system, the excess hits have no effect.
RELATED TOPICS: Destroyed, Space Combat
711
ASTEROID FIELD
An asteroid field is an anomaly that affects movement.
11.1
A ship cannot move through or into an asteroid field.
• Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat
rolls do not affect bombardment rolls.
• Multiple planets in a system may be bombarded, but a
player must declare which planet a unit is bombarding
before making a bombardment roll.
• The L1Z1X’s “Harrow” ability does not affect the L1Z1X
player’s own ground forces.
• Planets that contain a unit with the “Planetary Shield”
ability cannot be bombarded.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies
12
ATTACH
Some game effects instruct a player to attach a card to a planet card.
A card that is attached to a planet card modifies that planet card in
some way.
12.1
12.2
If a player gains or loses control of planet that contains a card
with an attach effect, the attached card stays with that planet. •
ATTACKER
During combat, the active player is the attacker.
RELATED TOPICS: Defender, Invasion, Space Combat
16
14.1
A player cannot use a blockaded unit to produce ships; he can
still use a blockaded unit to produce ground forces.
16.2
16.3
RELATED TOPICS: Producing Units, Ships
15
BOMBARDMENT (UNIT ABILITY)
A unit with the “Bombardment” ability may be able to destroy
another player’s ground forces during an invasion. During
the “Bombardment” step of an invasion, players perform the
following steps:
15.1
STEP 1— The active player chooses which planet each of his
units that has a “Bombardment” ability will bombard. Then he
rolls dice for each of those units; this is called a bombardment
roll. A hit is produced for each die roll that is equal to or greater
than the unit’s “Bombardment” value.
•
•
8
If a unit has a “Bombardment” ability, it is presented on its
faction sheet and technology cards.
The “Bombardment” ability is displayed as “Bombardment
X (Y).” The X is the minimum value needed for a die to
produce a hit, and Y is the number of dice rolled. Not all
“Bombardment” abilities have a (Y) value; a bombardment
roll for such a unit consists of one die.
CAPACITY (ATTRIBUTE)
Capacity is an attribute of some units that is presented on those
units’ faction sheets and technology cards.
BLOCKADED
A player’s unit with “Production” is blockaded if it is in a system
that contains another player’s ships but does not contain any of his
own ships.
If a player has to assign more hits than he has ground
forces, the excess hits have no effect.
RELATED TOPICS: Invasion, Planetary Shield
16.1
14
STEP 2— The player who controls the planet that is being
bombarded chooses and destroys one of his ground forces on
that planet for each hit result the bombardment roll produced.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Control, Planets
13
15.2
To attach a card to a planet card, a player places the card with
the attach effect partially underneath the planet card.
16.4
A unit’s capacity value indicates the maximum combined
number of fighters and ground forces that it can transport.
The combined capacity values of a player’s ships in a system
determine the number of fighters and ground forces he can have
in that system’s space area.
If a player has more fighters and ground forces in the space area
of a system than the total capacity of his ships in that system,
he must destroy the excess units of his choice.
• Ground forces on planets do not count against capacity.
• A player’s fighters and ground forces can exceed capacity
during combat. At the end of combat, he must destroy the
excess units.
Fighters and ground forces are not assigned to specific ships,
except while they are being transported.
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Capacity, Transport
17
COMBAT (ATTRIBUTE)
Combat is an attribute of some units that is presented on those units’
faction sheets and technology cards.
17.1
17.2
During combat, if a unit’s combat roll produces a result equal
to or greater than its combat value, it produces a hit.
If a unit’s combat value contains two or more burst icons,
instead of rolling a single die, the player rolls one die for each
burst icon when making that unit’s combat rolls.
RELATED TOPICS: Ground Combat, Invasion, Space CombatCOMMAND SHEET
TYPES OF ACTIONS
✦Strategic Action
✦ Tactical Action
✦Component Action
FLEET
THE TACTICAL ACTION
1) Activation
2) Movement
i) Move Ships
ii) Space Cannon Offense
3) Space Combat
i) Anti-Fighter Barrage
ii) Announce Retreats
iii) Make Combat Rolls
iv) Assign Hits
v) Retreat
4) Invasion
i) Bombardment
ii) Commit Ground Forces
iii) Space Cannon Defense
v) Ground Combat
vi) Establish Control
5) Production
STRATEGY
STATUS PHASE
1) Score Objectives
2) Reveal Public Objective
3) Draw Action Cards
4) Remove Command Tokens
5) Gain and Redistribute Tokens
6) Ready Cards
7) Repair Units
8) Return Strategy Cards
18.3
STATUS PHASE
1) Score Objectives
2) Reveal Public Objective
3) Draw Action Cards
4) Remove Command Tokens
5) Gain and Redistribute Tokens
6) Ready Cards
7) Repair Units
8) Return Strategy Cards
ANOMALIES
Asteroid Field
• Ships Cannot Move Through or Into
Nebula
• Ships Cannot Move Through
• Ships In Nebula Move Set to 1
• +1 Combat Die Results to
Defender Within Nebula
Supernova
• Ships Cannot Move Through or Into
Gravity Rift
• Each Ship Moving Through or Out
of Applies +1 Move and Rolls 1 die;
Unit is Destroyed on Result of 1–3.
•
STRATEGY
A player places trade good tokens in his trade good area; these
tokens can be spent as resources, influence, or to resolve certain
game effects that require trade goods.
Players who are familiar with the game can hide the quick
reference by placing that portion of the command sheet under
their faction sheets.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Fleet Pool, Strategic Action,
COMMAND TOKENS
Strategic Action, Tactical Action
20
20.1
20.2
20.3
20.4
20.5
19.2
19.3
A player begins the game with eight command tokens on his
command sheet: three in his tactic pool, three in his fleet pool,
and two in his strategy pool.
• Command tokens in the strategy and tactic pool are placed
with the faction symbol faceup.
• Command tokens in the fleet pool are placed with the ship
silhouette faceup.
When a player gains a command token, he chooses which of
the three pools on his command sheet to place it in.
A player is limited by the amount of command tokens in his
reinforcements.
•
19.4
If he would gain a command token but has none available in
his reinforcements, he cannot gain that command token.
During the action phase, a player can perform a tactical action
by spending a command token from his tactic pool; he places
the command token in a system.
COMMODITIES
Commodities represent goods that are plentiful for
their own faction and are desired by other factions.
A commodity has no inherent game effects, but
converts into a trade good if given to or received
from another player.
Command tokens are a currency that players use to perform actions
and expand their fleets.
19.1
A player does not spend a command token to resolve the
secondary ability of the “Leadership” strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Fleet Pool, Leadership, Reinforcements,
Tactical Action, Trade Goods
19
After a player performs a strategic action during the action
phase, each other player can resolve the secondary ability of
that strategy card by spending a command token from his own
strategy pool.
FLEET
A player places command
tokens in his pools; players
can use these command
tokens to perform strategic
and tactical actions and to
increase the number of ships they can have in each system.
ANOMALIES
Asteroid Field
• Ships Cannot Move Through or Into
Nebula
• Ships Cannot Move Through
• Ships In Nebula Move Set to 1
• +1 Combat Die Results to
Defender Within Nebula
Supernova
• Ships Cannot Move Through or Into
Gravity Rift
• Each Ship Moving Through or Out
of Applies +1 Move and Rolls 1 die;
Unit is Destroyed on Result of 1–3.
18.2
THE TACTICAL ACTION
1) Activation
2) Movement
i) Move Ships
ii) Space Cannon Offense
3) Space Combat
i) Anti-Fighter Barrage
ii) Announce Retreats
iii) Make Combat Rolls
iv) Assign Hits
v) Retreat
4) Invasion
i) Bombardment
ii) Commit Ground Forces
iii) Space Cannon Defense
v) Ground Combat
vi) Establish Control
5) Production
TACTIC
18.1
TYPES OF ACTIONS
✦Strategic Action
✦ Tactical Action
✦Component Action
TACTIC
Each player has a command sheet
that contains a strategy pool, a
tactic pool, a fleet pool, a trade
good area, and a quick reference.
19.5
18
20.6
20.7
20.8
Commodities and trade goods are represented by opposite sides
of the same token.
The commodity value on a player’s faction sheet indicates the
maximum number of commodity tokens he can have.
When an effect instructs a player to replenish commodities, he
takes the number of commodity tokens necessary so that the
amount he has equals the commodity value on his faction sheet.
Then, he places those tokens faceup in the commodity area of
his faction sheet.
When a player replenishes commodities, he takes the
commodity tokens from the supply.
Players can trade commodities following the rules for
transactions. When a player receives a commodity from another
player, the player who received that token converts it into a
trade good by placing it in the trade good area of his command
sheet with the trade good side faceup.
• That token is no longer a commodity token; it is a trade
good token.
• A player can trade commodity tokens before resolving a
game effect that allows him to replenish commodities.
Any game effect that instructs a player to give a commodity to
another player causes that commodity to be converted into a
trade good.
A player cannot spend commodities; he can only trade them
during a transaction.
Commodity tokens come in values of one and three. A player
can swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS: Deals, Trade Goods, Transactions
921
COMPONENT ACTION
23
A component action is a type of action that a player can perform
during his turn of an action phase.
21.1
21.2
21.3
21.4
Component actions can be found on various game components,
including action cards, technology cards, and faction sheets.
Each component action is indicated by an “Action” header.
To perform a component action, a player reads the action’s text
and follows the instructions as described.
The “Construction” strategy card allows players to construct
structures on planets they control. This card’s initiative value is “4.”
23.1
23.2
A component action cannot be performed if its ability cannot be
completely resolved.
If a component action is canceled, it does not use that player’s
action.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Action Cards, Action Phase,
Technology
23.3
22
COMPONENT LIMITATIONS
If a component type is depleted during the game, players obey the
following rules:
22.1
DICE: Dice are limitless. If a player needs to roll more dice than
the game provides, he should roll as many as possible, record
the results, and then reroll dice as necessary.
22.2
TOKENS: Tokens are limited to those included in the game,
23.4
except for the following:
22.3
22.4
• Control Tokens • Trade Good Tokens
• Fighter Tokens • Infantry Tokens
UNITS: Units are limited to those included in the game, except
•
•
When producing units, if a player does not have enough
units in his reinforcements, he can remove units from any
systems that do not contain one of his command tokens and
place them in his reinforcements. Then, he can produce any
units that he removed. He cannot remove units in this way
unless he is immediately producing a unit of that type.
When producing a fighter or infantry unit, a player can
use a fighter or infantry token, as appropriate, from the
supply instead of a plastic piece. These tokens must be
accompanied by at least one plastic piece of the same type;
players can swap infantry and fighter tokens for plastic
pieces at any time.
CARDS: When a deck is depleted, players shuffle the deck’s
discard pile and place it facedown to create a new deck.
RELATED TOPICS: Producing Units, Units
10
During the action phase, if the active player has the
“Construction” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action
to resolve that card’s primary ability.
To resolve the primary ability on the “Construction” strategy
card, the active player may place either one PDS or one space
dock on a planet he controls. Then, he may place an
additional PDS on a planet he controls.
• The structures can be placed on the same planet or different
planets.
• The structures can be placed in any systems, regardless of
whether the player has a command token in the system or not.
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Construction” strategy card, each other player, beginning
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding
clockwise, may place one command token from his strategy
pool in any system. If he already has a command token in
that system, the spent token is returned to his reinforcements
instead. Then, he places either one PDS or one space dock on a
planet he controls in that system.
When a player places either a PDS or space dock using the
“Construction” strategy card, he takes that PDS or space dock
from his reinforcements.
•
If any of the above tokens are depleted, players can use a
suitable substitute, such as a coin or bead.
for fighters and ground forces.
22.5
CONSTRUCTION (STRATEGY CARD)
If a player does not have enough units in his reinforcements,
he can remove units from any systems that do not
contain one of his command tokens and place them in his
reinforcements. Then, he must place this unit on the game
board as instructed by the effect placing the unit.
RELATED TOPICS: Initiative Order, Strategic Action, Strategy
Card, Structures
24
CONTROL
Each player begins the game with control of the planets in his
home system. During the game, players can gain control of
additional planets.
24.1
When a player gains control of a planet, he takes the planet
card that corresponds to that planet and places it in his play
area; that card is exhausted.
• If a player is the first player to control a planet, he takes the
planet card from the planet card deck.
• If another player controls the planet, he takes that planet’s
card from the other player’s play area.24.2
24.3
24.4
24.5
24.6
24.7
A player cannot gain control of a planet that he already controls.
26.3
While a player controls a planet, that planet’s card remains in
his play area until he loses control of that planet.
A player can control a planet that he does not have any units
on; he places a control token on that planet to mark that he
controls it.
26.4
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Phase, Influence, Victory Points
• 27
The player that placed units on the planet gains control of
that planet.
A player can also lose control of a planet through some game
effects.
27.1
If a player loses control of a planet that contains his control
token, he removes his control token from the planet.
COST (ATTRIBUTE)
Cost is an attribute of some units that is presented on those units’
faction sheets and technology cards. A unit’s cost determines the
number of resources a player must spend to produce that unit.
25.2
25.3
To produce a unit, a player must spend a number of resources
equal to or greater than the cost of the unit he is producing.
If the cost is accompanied by two icons—typically for
fighters and ground forces—a player produces two of that
unit for that cost.
If a unit does not have a cost, it cannot be produced.
•
Structures do not have costs and are usually placed by
resolving the “Construction” strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Producing Units, Resources
26
CUSTODIANS TOKEN
The custodians token begins each game on
Mecatol Rex. The token represents the caretakers
that safeguard the seat of the empire until the time
when one of the great races claims the throne.
26.1
26.2
Units can move into the system that contains
Mecatol Rex following normal rules; however, players cannot
commit ground forces to land on Mecatol Rex until the
custodians token is removed from the planet.
Before the “Commit Ground Forces” step of an invasion, the
active player can remove the custodians token from Mecatol
Rex by spending six influence. Then, he must commit at least
one ground force to land on the planet.
•
DEALS
A deal is an agreement between two players that may or may not
include a transaction that involves physical components.
27.2
25.1
After a player removes the custodians token from Mecatol
Rex, the agenda phase is added to all subsequent game rounds,
including the game round during which the custodians token
was removed from Mecatol Rex.
A player loses control of a planet if another player has units on
that planet and he no longer has units on it.
RELATED TOPICS: Attach, Exhausted, Invasion, Planets
25
When a player removes the custodians token from Mecatol
Rex, he takes the token from the game board and places it in
his play area. Then, he gains one victory point.
27.3
27.4
Players can make deals with each other at any time, even
if they are not neighbors. However, deals that include a
transaction must follow the rules for transactions, including that
the players be neighbors.
Deals are binding or non-binding according to the conditions of
the deal.
If the terms of a deal can be resolved immediately, it is a
binding deal. When a deal is binding, a player must adhere to
the terms of the agreement and whatever transactions, if any,
were agreed upon.
If the terms of a deal cannot be resolved immediately, it is a non-
binding deal. When a deal is non-binding, a player does not have
to adhere to any part of the agreement if he chooses not to.
RELATED TOPICS: Promissory Notes, Trade Goods, Trade Goods
28
DEFENDER
During either a space or ground combat, the player who is not the
active player is the defender.
RELATED TOPICS: Attacker, Invasion, Nebula, Space Combat
29
DESTROYED
Various game effects can cause a unit to be destroyed. When a
player’s unit is destroyed, it is removed from the game board and
returned to his reinforcements.
29.1
29.2
When a player assigns hits that were produced against his units,
he chooses a number of his units to be destroyed equal to the
number of hits produced against his units.
Forcing a player to remove a unit from the board by reducing
the number of command tokens in his fleet pool does not count
as destroying a unit.
RELATED TOPICS: Anti-Fighter Barrage, Bombardment, Space
Cannon, Space Combat, Sustain Damage
If he cannot commit ground forces to land on Mecatol Rex,
he cannot remove the custodians token.
1130
DIPLOMACY (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Diplomacy” strategy card can be used to preemptively prevent
other players from activating a specific system. It can also be used
to ready planets. This card’s initiative value is “2.”
30.1
30.2
30.3
During the action phase, if the active player has the
“Diplomacy” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to
resolve that card’s primary ability.
To resolve the primary ability on the “Diplomacy” strategy card,
the active player chooses a system that contains a planet he
controls other than the Mecatol Rex system and readies any of his
exhausted planets in that system. Then, each other player places
one command token from his reinforcements on that system.
32
Some cards can be exhausted. A player cannot resolve abilities or
spend the resources or influence of an exhausted card.
32.1
32.2
32.3
32.4
31.4
If a player already has a command token in the chosen
system, he does not place a command token there. RELATED TOPICS: Influence, Planets, Resources, Status Phase
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Diplomacy” strategy card, each other player, beginning
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding
clockwise, may spend one command token from his strategy
pool to ready up to two exhausted planets he controls.
ELIMINATION
33
• The player has no ground forces on the game board.
• The player has no unit that has “Production.”
• The player does not control any planets.
When a player becomes eliminated, all of the units, command
tokens, control tokens, promissory notes, technologies,
command sheets, as well as the faction sheet that matches his
faction or color are returned to the game box, including those in
his reinforcements.
When a player becomes eliminated, all agenda cards he owns
are discarded.
When a player becomes eliminated, each promissory note he
has that matches another player’s faction or color is returned to
that player.
Promissory notes that match the eliminated player are
returned to the game box, even if another player has them.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Control, Ground Forces,
Production, Promissory Notes
After a player performs a strategic action, he exhausts the
strategy card that corresponds to that action.
FIGHTER TOKENS
A fighter token functions as a plastic fighter unit
for all game purposes.
33.1
33.3
A player is eliminated when he meets all of the following three
conditions:
•
12
Abilities, including some found on technology cards, may
instruct a player to exhaust a card to resolve those abilities. If a
card is already exhausted, it cannot be exhausted again.
•
A player who is eliminated is no longer part of the game.
31.3
A player exhausts his planet cards to spend either the resources
or influence on that card.
32.5
33.2
31.2
During the “Ready Cards” step of the status phase, each player
readies all of his exhausted cards by flipping them faceup.
If a player has no command tokens in his reinforcements, he
places one of his choice from his command sheet.
Order, Planets, Readied, Strategic Action, Strategy Card
31.1
To exhaust a card, a player flips the card facedown.
•
RELATED TOPICS: Active System, Command Tokens, Initiative
31
EXHAUSTED
When producing a fighter unit, a player can
use a fighter token from the supply instead of
a plastic piece.
Players can replace their plastic fighters with tokens at any time.
If a player ever has a fighter token in a system that does not
contain one of his plastic fighters, he must replace it with one
of his plastic fighters from his reinforcements.
•
33.4
If he cannot replace the token, the unit is destroyed.
Fighter tokens come in values of one and three. A player can
swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS: Infantry Tokens, Producing Units
34
FLEET POOL
The fleet pool is an area of a player’s command sheet.
34.1
34.2
34.3
34.4
The number of command tokens in a player’s fleet pool
indicates the maximum number of non-fighter ships that a
player can have in a system.
Players place command tokens in their fleet pools with the ship
silhouette faceup.
If at any time the number of a player’s ships in a system
exceeds the number of tokens in his fleet pool, he chooses and
destroys excess ships in that system.
Players do not spend command tokens from this pool.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Sheet, Command Tokens, Ships,
System Tiles35
GAME BOARD
38.2
ground forces on the planet to be destroyed for each hit result
his opponent produced.
The game board consists of all system tiles in play.
35.1
The game board consists of all system tiles that were placed
during setup, even if the edges of those tiles do not touch any
other system tiles, such as the Ghosts of Creuss’ home system.
RELATED TOPICS: System Tiles
36
•
38.3
GAME ROUND
A game round consists of the following four phases:
STEP 2—ASSIGN HITS: Each player must choose one of his
38.4
1. Strategy Phase
2. Action Phase
After assigning hits, if both players still have ground forces on
the planet, players resolve a new combat round starting with the
“Roll Dice” step.
Combat ends when only one player (or neither player) has
ground forces on the planet.
• After a combat ends, the player with one or more ground
forces remaining on the planet is the winner of the combat;
the other player is the loser of the combat.
• If neither player has a ground force remaining, then there is
no winner; the combat ends in a draw.
3. Status Phase
4. Agenda Phase
36.1
36.2
36.3
Players skip the agenda phase during the early portion of each
game. After the custodians token is removed from Mecatol
Rex, the agenda phase is added to each game round.
RELATED TOPICS: Invasion, Planets
Player turns occur during the action phase.
Abilities that last until the end of a player’s turn do not persist
for the duration of a game round or into the other phases of
that game round. Those effects end at the end of that player’s
turn, before the next player’s turn begins.
39
37
39.1
37.1
A ship that will move out of or through a gravity rift at any
time during its movement, applies +1 to its move value.
•
37.2
39.2
GRAVITY RIFT
A gravity rift is an anomaly that affects movement.
This can allow a ship to reach the active system from farther
away than it normally could.
GROUND FORCES
A ground force is a type of unit. All infantry units in the game are
ground forces. Some races have unique infantry units.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Agenda Phase, Custodians
Token, Status Phase, Strategy Phase
When a unit is destroyed, the player who controls that
unit removes it from the board and places it in his
reinforcements.
39.3
Ground forces are always either on planets or being transported
by ships that have a capacity value.
Ground forces being transported by a ship are placed in a
system’s space area along with the ship that is transporting
them.
There is no limit to the number of ground forces a player can
have on a planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Control, Infantry Tokens, Transport,
Units
Each ship that moves out of or through a gravity rift rolls one
die after moving; on a result of 1–3, that ship is destroyed.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies, Movement
38
GROUND COMBAT
During the “Invasion” step of a tactical action, if the active player
commits ground forces to land on a planet that contains another
player’s ground forces, those players resolve a ground combat
on that planet. To resolve a ground combat, players perform the
following steps:
38.1
STEP 1—ROLL DICE: Each player rolls one die for each ground
force he has on the planet; this is a combat roll. If a unit’s
combat roll produces a result that is equal to or greater than that
unit’s combat value, that roll produces a hit.
•
If a unit’s combat value contains two or more burst icons,
the player rolls one die for each burst icon instead.
1340
IMPERIAL
(STRATEGY CARD)
The “Imperial” strategy card allows players to score victory points
and draw secret objectives. This card’s initiative value is “8.”
40.1
40.2
40.3
40.4
During the action phase, if the active player has the “Imperial”
strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to resolve that
card’s primary ability.
To resolve the primary ability on the “Imperial” strategy card,
the active player can score one public objective of his choice if
he meets that objective’s requirements as described on its card.
Then, if the active player controls Mecatol Rex, he gains one
victory point; if he does not control Mecatol Rex, he can draw
one secret objective card.
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Imperial” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise,
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to draw
one secret objective card.
If a player has more than three secret objective cards after
drawing a secret objective, he must choose one of his unscored
secret objectives and return it to the secret objective deck.
This number includes the secret objective cards in the player’s
hand and the cards he has already scored. Then, he shuffles the
secret objective deck.
RELATED TOPICS: Initiative Order, Objective Cards, Strategic
42
Influence represents a planet’s political power. Players spend
influence to gain command tokens using the “Leadership” strategy
card, and the influence values of planets are used to cast votes
during the agenda phase.
42.1
42.2
42.3
41.1
41.2
41.3
When producing an infantry unit, a player can
use an infantry token from the supply instead
of a plastic piece.
Players can replace their plastic infantry with tokens at any
time.
If a player ever has an infantry token on a planet that does
not contain one of his plastic infantry or in the space area
of a system that does not contain one of his plastic infantry,
he must replace it with one of his plastic infantry from his
reinforcements.
•
41.4
If he cannot replace the token, the unit is destroyed.
Infantry tokens come in values of one and three. A player can
swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS: Fighter Tokens, Producing Units
14
A player can spend a planet’s influence by exhausting that
planet’s card.
A player can spend a trade good as if it were one influence.
Players cannot spend trade goods to cast votes during the
agenda phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Phase, Exhausted, Leadership, Agenda
Phase
43
INITIATIVE ORDER
Initiative order is the order in which players resolve steps of the
action and status phases.
43.1
43.2
Initiative order is determined by the initiative numbers on
strategy cards.
Initiative order begins with the player who has the lowest-
numbered strategy card and proceeds to the player who has the
strategy card that is next in numerical order.
•
INFANTRY TOKENS
An infantry token functions as a plastic infantry
unit for all game purposes.
A planet’s influence is the rightmost value (surrounded by a
blue border) found on the planet’s system tile and planet card.
•
Action, Strategy Card
41
INFLUENCE
43.3
Only strategy cards that were chosen during the strategy
phase are used when determining initiative order; strategy
cards not chosen during the strategy phase are ignored.
When playing with three or four players, a player’s initiative is
determined only by his lowest-numbered strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Strategy Card, Status Phase44
INVASION
45
LEADERSHIP (STRATEGY CARD)
Invasion is a step of the tactical action during which the active player
can land ground forces on planets to gain control of those planets. The “Leadership” strategy card allows players to gain command
tokens. This card’s initiative value is “1.”
To resolve an invasion, players perform the following steps: 45.1
44.1
STEP 1—BOMBARDMENT: The active player may use the
“Bombardment” ability of any of his units in the active system.
44.2
STEP 2—COMMIT GROUND FORCES: If the active player 45.2
• To commit a ground force to a planet, the active player
places that ground force unit on that planet. 45.3
• The planet may contain another player’s ground forces. • If the active player does not wish to commit ground forces,
he proceeds to the “Production” step of the tactical action.
has ground forces in the space area of the active system, he
may commit any number of those ground forces to land on any
of the planets in that system.
44.3
44.4
STEP 3—SPACE CANNON DEFENSE: If the active player
To resolve the primary ability on the “Leadership” strategy
card, the active player gains three command tokens. Then, he
can spend any amount of his influence to gain one command
token for every three influence he spends.
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Leadership” strategy card, each other player, beginning
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding
clockwise, may spend any amount of influence to gain one
command token for every three influence he spends.
When a player gains command tokens, he places each token on
his command sheet in the pool of his choice.
commits any ground forces to a planet that contains units
that have the “Space Cannon” ability, those “Space Cannon”
abilities can be used against the committed ground forces. RELATED TOPICS: Command Sheet, Command Tokens, Influence,
• 46
If the active player committed ground forces to more than
one planet that contained units with a “Space Cannon”
ability, the active player chooses the order in which those
“Space Cannon” abilities are resolved.
STEP 4—GROUND COMBAT: If the active player commits
ground forces to land on a planet that contains another
player’s ground forces, those players resolve a ground combat
on that planet.
•
44.5
45.4
During the action phase, if the active player has the
“Leadership” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to
resolve that card’s primary ability.
If players must resolve a combat on more than one planet,
the active player chooses the order in which those combats
are resolved.
STEP 5—ESTABLISH CONTROL: The active player gains
control of each planet he committed ground forces to that still
contains at least one of his ground forces.
• When a player gains control of a planet, any structures on
the planet that belong to other players are immediately
destroyed.
• When a player gains control of a planet, he gains the planet
card that matches that planet and exhausts that card.
• A player cannot gain control of a planet he already controls.
• If there was a combat, and all units belonging to both
players were destroyed, the player who was the defender
retains control of the planet and places one of his control
markers on the planet.
Initiative Order, Strategic Action, Strategy Card
MECATOL REX
Mecatol Rex is the planet placed in the center of the game board
during setup.
46.1
During setup, the custodians token is placed on Mecatol Rex. This
token prevents a player from committing ground forces to land
on the planet unless he spends six influence to remove the token.
RELATED TOPICS: Custodians Token
47
MODIFIERS
A modifier is a number that is applied by an ability to increase or
decrease the attribute values of a unit or the results of a die roll.
47.1
47.2
A modifier is always preceded by the word “apply” followed by
a numerical value.
A modifier value preceded by a “+” is added to the attribute
or result being modified; a modifier value preceded by a “-” is
subtracted from the attribute or result being modified.
RELATED TOPICS: Combat, Cost, Move
RELATED TOPICS: Bombardment, Combat, Control, Ground
Combat, Ground Forces, Opponent, PDS, Planets
1548
MOVE (ATTRIBUTE)
Move is an attribute of some units that is presented on those units’
faction sheets and technology cards.
48.1
49.2
49.3
Most ships have a move value printed on their faction sheets
and technology cards. This value indicates the distance from its
current system that a ship can move.
STEP 1—MOVE SHIPS: A player can move any number of his
eligible ships into the active system, obeying the following rules:
50.3
Other abilities and effects can increase this number.
If a space combat occurs in a nebula, the defender applies +1 to
the combat rolls of his ships during that combat.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies
51
NEIGHBORS
Two players are neighbors if they both have a unit or control a
planet in the same system. They are also neighbors if they both have
a unit or control a planet in systems that are adjacent to each other.
51.1
51.2
Players can resolve transactions with their neighbors.
Players are neighbors if the adjacency of systems is granted by
a wormhole.
The ship cannot move through a system that contains non-
fighter ships controlled by another player. • The ship cannot move if it started its movement in another
system that contains one of its faction’s command tokens. RELATED TOPICS: Neighbors, Promissory Notes, Transactions
• The ship can move through systems that contain its own
faction’s command tokens. 52
• The ship can move out of the active system and back into it
if its move value is high enough.
51.3
When a ship with a capacity value moves or is moved, it may
transport ground forces and fighters.
49.7 STEP 2—SPACE CANNON OFFENSE: After the “Move
52.1
52.2
52.3
52.4
ABILITY MOVEMENT 52.5
Cannon, Tactical Action, Transport
OBJECTIVE CARDS
There are two types of objective cards: public objectives and
secret objectives.
•
Ships” step, players can use the “Space Cannon” abilities of
their units in the active system.
If an ability moves a unit outside of the “Movement” step of a
tactical action, players follow the rules specified by that ability;
neither a unit’s move value nor the rules specified above apply.
Players are neighbors with the Ghosts of Creuss if the Ghosts
of Creuss’ “Quantum Entanglement” faction ability is causing
adjacency from the perspective of the Ghosts of Creuss player.
Players can score objectives to gain victory points.
The ship must move along a path of adjacent systems, and
the number of systems the ship enters cannot exceed its
move value.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Active System, Capacity, Space
16
•
• The active player’s ships move simultaneously.
49.9
A ship that begins the “Movement” step of a tactical action in a
nebula treats its move value as “1” for the duration of that step.
The ship must end its movement in the active system. 49.6
49.8
50.2
A ship cannot move through a nebula. That is, a ship cannot
move into and out of a nebula during the same movement.
•
•
49.5
A ship can only move into a nebula if it is the active system.
•
TACTICAL ACTION MOVEMENT
To resolve movement, players perform the following steps:
49.4
50.1
MOVEMENT
A player can move his ships by resolving a tactical action during the
action phase. Additionally, some abilities can move a unit outside of
the tactical action.
NEBULA
A nebula is an anomaly that affects movement and combat.
A unit’s move value indicates the distance from its current
system that it can move during the “Movement” step of a
tactical action.
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Tactical Action
49
50
Each public objective has a “I” or “II” on the back of its
card; all other objectives are secret objectives.
Each objective card indicates a number of victory points that a
player gains by scoring that objective.
Each objective card indicates the phase during which a player
can score that objective—either the status phase or action phase.
Each objective card describes the requirement a player must
fulfill to score that objective.
If a player fulfills the requirement described on an objective
card, he can score that objective following the timing indicated
on the card, either during the action phase or the status phase.
•
When a player scores an objective during the status phase,
he must fulfill the requirement on the card during the “Score
Objectives” step of the status phase to score that objective.•
52.6
52.7
A player can score a maximum of one public objective and one
secret objective during each status phase.
A player can score any number of objectives during a turn of
the action phase; however, he can only score one objective
during each combat.
•
52.8
52.9
52.11
If an objective requires a player to destroy one or more units,
those units can be destroyed by producing hits against them,
playing action cards, using technology, or any number of other
abilities that use the “destroy” terminology.
52.13
52.14
PUBLIC OBJECTIVES
When scoring a public objective, the
player places one of his control tokens
on that objective’s card. Then, he
advances his control token on the victory
point track a number of spaces equal to
the number of victory points he gained.
52.20
52.21
A player can only score his own secret objectives; he cannot
score secret objectives revealed by other players.
Each player begins the game with one secret objective.
Each player can have up to three total scored and unscored
secret objectives.
•
52.22
If a player draws a secret objective and has more than three,
he must choose one of his unscored secret objectives and
return it to the deck. Then, he shuffles the secret objective
deck.
A player can gain secret objectives by resolving either the
primary or secondary ability of the “Imperial” strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Imperial, Status Phase, Victory Points
53
OPPONENT
During combat, a player’s opponent is the other player that either
has ships in the system at the start of the space combat or has
ground forces on the planet at the start of a ground combat.
53.1
A player who does not have units on either side of a combat is
not an opponent. He cannot use abilities or have abilities used
against him that are used against an opponent.
RELATED TOPICS: Ground Combat, Invasion, Space Combat
• 54
The speaker reveals two of the stage I objective cards
during setup. All other objective cards remain facedown.
During each status phase, the speaker reveals a facedown
public objective card.
The speaker does not reveal stage II objective cards until all
stage I objective cards are revealed.
If the speaker must reveal a facedown public objective card but
all public objective cards are already revealed, the game ends
immediately.
•
52.16
52.19
When scoring a secret objective, a player
reveals the objective by placing it faceup
in his play area. Then, he places one of
his control tokens on that objective’s
card and advances his control token
on the victory point track a number of
spaces equal to the number of victory points he gained.
Each game contains five stage I and five stage II public
objective cards that the speaker places facedown near the
victory point track during setup.
•
52.15
52.18
Forcing a player to remove a unit from the board by
reducing the number of command tokens in his fleet pool
does not count as destroying a unit.
Players can score some objectives by spending resources,
influence, or tokens, as described by the objective card. To
score such an objective, a player must pay the specified cost at
the time indicated on the card.
SECRET OBJECTIVES
A secret objective is an objective that is
controlled by one player and is hidden from
all other players until it is scored.
A player can score an objective during both the space combat
and the ground combat during the same tactical action.
A public objective is an objective that is
revealed to all players.
52.12
52.17
A player can score each objective only once during the game.
•
52.10
When a player scores an objective during the action phase,
he can do so at any time during that phase.
The player with the most victory points is the winner. If one
or more players are tied for having the most victory points,
the tied player who is first in initiative order is the winner.
A player cannot score public objectives if he does not control
each of the planets in his home system.
PDS
A PDS (planetary defense system) is a structure that allows a player
to defend his territory against invading forces.
54.1
54.2
54.3
54.4
Each PDS has the “Space Cannon” ability.
The primary way by which players acquire PDS units is
by resolving either the primary or secondary ability of the
“Construction” strategy card.
A PDS unit is placed on a planet. Each planet can have a
maximum of two PDS units.
If a player’s PDS is ever on a planet that contains a unit that
belongs to another player and does not contain any of his own
ground forces, that PDS is destroyed.
RELATED TOPICS: Structures, Space Cannon
1755
PLANETS
56.3
Planets provide players with resources and
influence. Planets are on system tiles and each
has a name, a resource value, and an influence
value. Some planets also have traits.
55.1
55.2
55.3
A planet’s resources are indicated by the
upper-left value that is surrounded by a
yellow border.
A planet’s influence is indicated by the
lower-right value that is surrounded by a
blue border.
55.5
0
LAZAR
The only inhabited world in a
forgettable system. Few native
resources and only rudimentary, often
underdeveloped, industries.
A Hazardous
Planet
An Industrial
Planet
55.7
57.1
57.2
55.8
56
Units cannot use the “Bombardment” ability against a planet that
contains a unit that has the “Planetary Shield” ability.
56.1
56.2
18
The “Planetary Shield” ability does not prevent a planet from
being affected by the “X-89 Bacterial Weapon” technology.
The “Planetary Shield” ability prevents an L1Z1X player from
using his “Harrow” faction ability.
During the action phase, if the active player has the “Politics”
strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to resolve that
card’s primary ability.
To resolve the primary ability on the “Politics” strategy card,
the active player resolves the following effects in order:
iii. The active player secretly looks at the top two cards of
the agenda deck. Then, he places each card on either
the top or the bottom of the deck. If he places both
cards on either the top or bottom, he can place them in
any order.
57.3
A player cannot spend an exhausted planet’s resources or
influence.
PLANETARY SHIELD (UNIT ABILITY)
POLITICS (STRATEGY CARD)
ii. The active player draws two action cards.
A planet card has both a readied and exhausted state. When
a planet is readied, it is placed faceup. When a planet is
exhausted, it is placed facedown.
Resources, System Tiles, Technology
A war sun can use its “Bombardment” ability against planets
that contain units that have the “Planetary Shield” ability.
have the speaker token. He may choose himself as
long as he does not have the speaker token. The chosen
player places the speaker token in his play area; he is
now the speaker.
PLANET CARD
RELATED TOPICS: Control, Exhausted, Influence, Readied,
•
i. The active player chooses any player that does not
Some planets have a technology specialty, which allows
those planets to be exhausted to satisfy a prerequisite when
researching technology.
A player can spend a readied planet’s resources or influence.
Units treated as if they do not have a “Planetary Shield”
ability cannot use the “Magen Defense Grid” technology.
The “Politics” strategy card allows players to draw action cards.
Additionally, the active player chooses a new speaker and may be able
to look at cards in the agenda deck. This card’s initiative value is “3.”
Each planet has a corresponding planet card that displays its name,
resource value, influence value, and trait, if it has one. If a player
controls a planet, he keeps that planet’s card in his play area.
55.6
•
RELATED TOPICS: Bombardment
57
A planet’s trait has no inherent effects, but some game effects
refer to a planet’s trait. There are three traits: cultural,
hazardous, and industrial.
A Cultural
Planet
55.4
1
If a war sun is in a system with any number of other players’
units that have the “Planetary Shield” ability, those units are
treated as if they do not have that ability.
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Politics” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise,
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to draw
two action cards.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Cards, Agenda Card, Initiative Order,
Speaker, Strategy Card, Strategic Action
58
PRODUCING UNITS
The primary way in which a player produces new units is by resolving
the “Production” abilities of his units during a tactical action.
However, other game effects also allow players to produce units.
58.1
Each unit that a player can produce has a cost value presented
on its faction sheet or technology card. To produce a unit,
a player must spend a number of resources from planets he
controls equal to or greater than the cost value of the unit he is
producing.58.2
58.3
58.4
58.5
• Any resources spent in excess of a unit’s cost are lost.
• If a player is producing multiple units at a time, he can add
the cost of all the units he is producing to create a total cost
before he spends any resources.
If the cost is accompanied by two icons—typically for
fighters and ground forces—a player produces two of that
unit for that cost.
• Each of the two units counts toward the total number of
units a player can produce.
• A player can choose to produce only one unit; however, he
must still pay the entire cost.
59.2
59.3
59.4
When a player produces a unit through the use of his units’
“Production” abilities during a tactical action, he follows the
rules of the “Production” ability to determine where he can
place his units in the active system.
When a player produces a unit through an ability outside of the
tactical action, that ability will state where the player can place
the units he is producing and how many units he can produce.
A player is limited by the number of units in his
reinforcements.
•
•
58.6
•
If he does not have enough units in his reinforcements,
he can remove units from any systems that do not
contain one of his command tokens and place them in his
reinforcements. Then, he can produce any units that he
removed. He cannot remove a unit in this way unless he is
immediately producing a unit of that type.
When producing a fighter or infantry unit, he can use a
fighter or infantry token, as appropriate, from the supply
instead of a plastic piece.
A player cannot use a blockaded unit to produce ships, but he
can use it to produce ground forces.
59
59.1
60
If the active player has multiple units in the active system
that have the “Production” ability, he can produce a
number of units up to the combined total of all of his units’
production values in that system.
If a player uses the “Production” ability of a unit in a space area
of a system to produce ground forces, those ground forces may
either be placed on a planet the player controls in that system or
in the space area of that system.
If a player places a ground force in the space area of a
system, it cannot exceed that player’s capacity in that system.
PROMISSORY NOTES
Each player begins the game with one unique
and four generic promissory note cards that
he can give to other players.
60.1
Each promissory note contains timing
text and ability text. A player can resolve
any promissory note cards that he has by
following the text on the card.
•
60.2
60.3
60.4
60.5
60.7
When the green player
replenishes commodities:
The green player gives you all
of his commodities.
Then, return this card to the
green player.
Promissory notes are not mandatory
unless otherwise specified.
Promissory notes that are returned to a player are returned after
their abilities have been completely resolved.
If a promissory note is returned to a player, that player may
give it to other players again as part of a future transaction.
An unrevealed promissory note is not subject to effects in its
ability text that return the card if certain conditions are met.
When resolving a transaction, a player can trade a maximum
of one promissory note from his hand to another player, even if
that card originally belonged to another player.
•
60.6
TRADE
AGREEMENT
A player cannot play his own promissory notes. Since the cards
are only valuable to other players, promissory notes can be
traded as powerful negotiation tools.
•
A unit’s “Production” ability on its faction sheet is always
followed by a value. This value is the maximum number of
units that this unit can produce.
•
When a player produces ground forces, he must place those unit
on planets that contain a unit that used its “Production” ability.
RELATED TOPICS: Blockaded, Producing Units, Space Dock
PRODUCTION (UNIT ABILITY)
During the “Production” step of a tactical action, the active player
can resolve the “Production” ability of each of his units that are in
the active system in order to produce units.
When a player produces ships by using “Production,” he must
place them in the active system.
•
RELATED TOPICS: Blockaded, Cost, Fighter Tokens, Infantry
Tokens, Production, Space Dock, Tactical Action
When producing fighters or infantry, each individual unit
counts toward the space dock’s production limit. If a
player can only produce one unit but wishes to produce the
aforementioned units, he may, but he produces only one
unit despite paying the full cost.
Promissory notes in the play area cannot be traded.
Players should keep their hands of promissory notes hidden.
If a player is eliminated, all of the promissory notes that match
his color or faction are returned to the game box, including
those that are in play or owned by other players.
•
Other players’ promissory notes are returned to those players.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Elimination, Neighbors, Transactions
1961
READIED
Cards have a readied state, which indicates that a player can exhaust
or resolve the abilities on those cards.
61.1
61.2
61.3
A card that is readied is placed faceup in a player’s play area; a
card that is exhausted is placed facedown in a player’s area.
A player can exhaust a readied planet card to spend resources
or influence from that card’s planet.
A player can exhaust certain readied technology cards to
resolve those cards’ abilities.
•
61.4
61.5
61.6
Such a technology will specifically instruct a player to
exhaust the card as part of the ability’s cost.
64.2 A player spends a planet’s resources by exhausting its card.
64.3 A player can spend a trade good as if it were one resource.
RELATED TOPICS: Exhausted, Planets, Producing Units, Trade
Goods
65
A ship is a unit type consisting of carriers, cruisers, dreadnoughts,
destroyers, fighters, and war suns. Each race also has a unique
flagship.
65.1
65.2
If a card is exhausted, a player cannot resolve that card’s abilities
or spend resources or influence on that card until it is readied.
During a “Ready Cards” step, each player readies all of his
exhausted cards by flipping them faceup.
When a player performs a strategic action, he exhausts his
chosen strategy card.
•
That card is later readied during the status phase.
65.3
A player’s reinforcements are his personal supply of units and
command tokens that are not on the game board or otherwise in use.
62.1
The components in a player’s reinforcements are limited.
REROLLS
Some game effects instruct a player to reroll dice.
63.1
63.2
63.3
When a die is rerolled, its new result is used instead of its
previous result.
The same ability cannot be used to reroll the same die multiple
times, but multiple abilities can be used to reroll a single die.
Die rerolls must occur immediately after rolling the dice, before
other abilities or dice rolls are resolved.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Action Cards, Ground Combat, Space
Ships can have any number of the following attributes: cost,
combat, move, and capacity. These attributes are shown on both
a ship’s faction sheet and a ship’s technology cards.
SPACE CANNON
RESOURCES
Resources represent a planet’s material value and industry. Many game
effects, such as producing units, require players to spend resources.
64.1
20
A planet’s resources are the leftmost value that is surrounded
by a yellow border on the planet’s system tile and planet card.
(UNIT ABILITY)
A unit that has the “Space Cannon” ability can use it during two
different steps of a player’s tactical action: after the “Move Ships”
substep (Space Cannon Offense) and during an invasion (Space
Cannon Defense).
66.1
66.2
A player is not required to be the active player to use the
“Space Cannon” abilities of his units.
SPACE CANNON OFFENSE
During a tactical action, after the “Move Ships” substep of the
“Movement” step, players can resolve the “Space Cannon” abilities
of their units by performing the following steps:
66.3
STEP 1­— Beginning with the active player and proceeding
clockwise, each player may use the “Space Cannon” ability
of each of his units in the active system by rolling a specific
number of dice for each of those units; these are called space
cannon rolls. A hit is produced for each die roll that is equal to or
greater than the unit’s “Space Cannon” value.
• If a unit has a “Space Cannon” ability, it is present on its
faction sheet and technology cards.
• “Space Cannon” is displayed as “Space Cannon X (Y).”
The X is the minimum value needed for a die to produce
a hit, and Y is the number of dice rolled. Not all “Space
Cannon” abilities are accompanied by a (Y) value; a space
cannon roll for such a unit consists of one die.
Combat
64
Fighters do not count toward the fleet pool limit, and
instead count against a player’s capacity.
Space Combat, Units
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Component Limitations, Units
63
A player can have a number of ships in a system equal to or
less than the number of command tokens in his fleet pool.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Cost, Combat, Fleet Pool, Move,
66
REINFORCEMENTS
Ships are always placed in space.
•
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Exhausted, Status Phase
62
SHIPS66.4
66.5
• If a player has the “Deep Space Cannon” technology, he can
use the “Space Cannon” ability of his PDS units that are in
systems that are adjacent to the active system. The hits are
still assigned to units in the active system.
• Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat
rolls do not affect space cannon rolls.
This ability can be used even if no ships were moved during the
“Move Ships” step.
STEP 2­­— The active player must choose and destroy one of his
ships in the active system for each hit result produced against
his units.
•
66.6
If the active player is using the “Space Cannon” ability of
his units, he chooses a player who has ships in the active
system. That player must choose and destroy one of his
ships in the active system for each hit the space cannon roll
produced.
SPACE CANNON DEFENSE
During the invasion step of a tactical action, after ground forces
have been committed to land on planets, players other than the
active player can resolve the “Space Cannon” abilities of their units
on those planets by performing the following these steps:
66.7
STEP 1— Each player may use the “Space Cannon” ability of
each of his units on the invaded planet by rolling a specific
number of dice for each of those units; this is called a space
cannon roll. A hit is produced for each die roll that is equal to or
greater than the unit’s “Space Cannon” value.
66.8
• If a unit has a “Space Cannon” ability, it is present on its
faction sheet and technology cards.
• “Space Cannon” is displayed as “Space Cannon X (Y).”
The X is the minimum value needed for a die to produce
a hit, and Y is the number of dice rolled. Not all “Space
Cannon” abilities are accompanied by a (Y) value; a space
cannon roll for such a unit consists of one die.
• Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat
rolls do not affect space cannon rolls.
• Game effects that allow the use of “Space Cannon” abilities
against ships in adjacent systems have no effect during
Space Cannon Defense.
STEP 2— The active player must choose and destroy one of his
ground forces on the planet for each hit the space cannon roll
produced.
•
Hits can only be assigned to units that were committed
to the same planet as the units using the “Space Cannon”
ability.
RELATED TOPICS: Active System, Attacker, Defender, Destroyed,
Invasion, Sustain Damage, Movement, Tactical Action
2167
- - If a player has an ability that rerolls a die or affects a
die after it is rolled, he must resolve such an ability
immediately after rolling the die. For example, if the
player made a combat roll for his destroyer, he must
decide if he wants to use an ability to reroll that die
before making a combat roll for his dreadnought.
SPACE COMBAT
After resolving the “Space Cannon Offense” step of a tactical
action, if two players have ships in the active system, those players
must resolve a space combat.
67.1
67.2
If the active player is the only player with ships in the system,
he skips the “Space Combat” step of the tactical action and
proceeds to the “Invasion” step.
If an ability occurs “before combat,” it occurs immediately
before the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” step.
- - The attacker makes all of his combat rolls during this
step before the defender. This procedure is important for
abilities that allow a player to reroll an opponent’s die.
67.6
one of his ships in the active system for each hit his opponent
produced.
To resolve a space combat, players perform the following steps:
67.3
STEP 1—ANTI-FIGHTER BARRAGE: If this is the first round
of a space combat, the players may simultaneously use the
“Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability of any of their units in the
active system.
•
•
67.4
If one or both players no longer have ships in the active
system after resolving this step, the space combat ends
immediately.
67.7
Before assigning hits, players may use their units’ “Sustain
Damage” abilities to cancel hits.
• When a unit is destroyed, the player who controls that
unit removes it from the board and places it in his
reinforcements.
STEP 5—RETREAT: If a player announced a retreat during the
• To retreat, a player takes all of his ships in the combat and
move them to an adjacent system.
• The system that a player’s units retreat to must contain
one or more of his units, a planet he controls, or both.
Additionally, the system cannot contain ships controlled by
another player.
• After retreating, a player must place a command token from
his reinforcements in the system to which he retreated. If
that system already contains one of his command tokens, he
does not place an additional token there. If the player has
no command tokens in his reinforcements, he must use one
from his command sheet instead.
STEP 2—ANNOUNCE RETREATS: Each player may
• A retreat will not occur immediately; the units will retreat at
the end of the combat round.
• If the defender announces a retreat, the attacker cannot
announce a retreat during that combat round.
• If a player wishes to retreat with any of his ground forces
that are on planets he controls in the active system, he may
place those units in the space area of the active system
during this step.
STEP 3—ROLL DICE: Each player rolls one die for each ship
he has in the active system; this is called a combat roll. If a
unit’s combat roll produces a result that is equal to or greater
than that unit’s combat value, that result produces a hit.
• If a unit’s combat value contains two or more burst icons,
the player rolls one die for each burst icon instead.
• If a player has ships that have different combat values in the
active system, he rolls these dice separately.
- - First, he should roll all dice for his units with a combat
value of “1.” Then, he should roll all dice for his units with
combat value of “2,” and then “3,” continuing in numerical
order until he has rolled dice for each of his ships.
- - A player keeps track of the number of hits his combat
rolls produce. The total number of hits he produces will
destroy units during the “Assign Hits” step.
22
•
first step of a combat, he must retreat.
Players cannot resolve “Anti-Fighter Barrage” abilities
during any rounds of space combat other than the first round.
announce a retreat, beginning with the defender.
67.5
STEP 4—ASSIGN HITS: Each player must choose and destroy
67.8
67.9
67.10
After the “Retreat” step, if both players still have ships in the
active system, they resolve another round of space combat
beginning with the “Announce Retreats” step.
Space combat ends when only one player—or neither player—
has a ship in the active system.
After a combat ends, the player with one or more ships
remaining in the system is the winner of the combat; the other
player is the loser of the combat. If neither player has a ship
remaining, the combat ends in a draw and there is no winner.
•
If the winner of the combat has fighters or ground forces in
space that exceed his ships’ capacity in the active system, he
must destroy the excess units of his choice.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Fleet Pool, Opponent, Sustain
Damage, Tactical Action, Transport68
SPACE DOCK
A space dock is a structure that allows players to produce units.
68.1
68.2
68.3
68.4
Each space dock has a “Production” ability that indicates the
number of units it can produce.
The primary way in which players acquire space docks is
by resolving either the primary or secondary abilities of the
“Construction” strategy card.
Space docks are placed on planets. Each planet can have a
maximum of one space dock.
70.1
SPEAKER
70.2
69.2
During the strategy phase, the speaker is the first player to
choose a strategy card.
70.3
During setup, the speaker prepares the objectives.
69.4 During the status phase, the speaker reveals a public objective.
69.5
69.6
A random player gains the speaker token during setup before
the game begins.
During the action phase, if a player resolves the primary ability
on the “Politics” strategy card, he chooses any player other than
the current speaker to gain the speaker token.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Agenda Phase, Objective Cards,
Politics, Strategy Phase
• The speaker cannot reveal “Stage II” objectives until all
“Stage I” objectives are revealed.
• The game ends if there are no unrevealed public objectives
at the start of this step.
STEP 3—DRAW ACTION CARDS: Following initiative order,
each player draws one action card.
70.4
STEP 4—REMOVE COMMAND TOKENS: Each player
removes all of his command tokens from the game board and
returns them to his reinforcements.
70.5
STEP 5—GAIN AND REDISTRIBUTE COMMAND TOKENS:
Each player gains two command tokens from his reinforcements.
Then, he can redistribute all of the command tokens on his
command sheet, including the two he just gained, among his
strategy, tactic, and fleet pools.
During the agenda phase, the speaker reveals the top agenda
card from the agenda deck before each vote. The speaker is
always the last player to vote and decides which outcome to
resolve if the outcomes are tied.
69.3
STEP 2—REVEAL PUBLIC OBJECTIVE: The speaker reveals
an unrevealed public objective card by flipping that card
faceup.
The speaker is the player who has the speaker token.
69.1
STEP 1—SCORE OBJECTIVES: Following initiative order,
each player may score up to one public objective and one secret
objective that can be fulfilled during the status phase. To score
an objective, he must fulfill the requirements on the card; if he
does, he gains a number of victory points indicated on the card.
The Clan of Saar’s “Floating Factory” faction-specific space
dock is destroyed when it is blockaded; that is to say, when
it is in a system with another player’s ships and none of the
Clan of Saar’s ships.
RELATED TOPICS: Construction, Producing Units, Structures
STATUS PHASE
During the status phase, players score objectives and prepare for
the next game round. To resolve the status phase, players perform
the following steps:
If a player’s space dock is ever on a planet that contains a unit
that belongs to another player and does not contain any of his
own ground forces, that space dock is destroyed.
•
69
70
70.6
• Players should remember to check the number of their ships
in each system after reducing the size of their fleet pools.
• This step can usually be resolved simultaneously, but if
there is a timing conflict, it is resolved in initiative order.
STEP 6—READY CARDS: Each player readies all of his
exhausted cards, including strategy cards.
70.7
STEP 7—REPAIR UNITS: Each player repairs all of his units
that have the “Sustain Damage” ability by turning those units
upright.
70.8
STEP 8—RETURN STRATEGY CARDS: Each player returns
his strategy card to the common play area. Then, if a player
has removed the custodians token from Mecatol Rex, the game
round continues to the agenda phase. Otherwise, a new game
round begins with the strategy phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Cards, Agenda Phase, Custodians Token,
Command Tokens, Game Round, Objective Cards, Readied, Sustain
Damage, Strategy Card, Strategy Phase
2371
STRATEGIC ACTION
72.7
During the action phase, the active player may perform a strategic
action to resolve the primary ability on his strategy card.
71.1
After the active player resolves the primary ability on his
strategy card, each other player, beginning with the player to
the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise, may
resolve that strategy card’s secondary ability.
•
71.2
71.3
72.8
72.3
72.4
72.5
72.6
24
Strategy cards in the common play area are available for
players to choose during the strategy phase.
• A strategy card in a player’s play area belongs to that
player until it is returned to the common play area during
the status phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Construction, Diplomacy, Initiative Order,
• During the strategy phase, each player chooses a strategy card to use
during the round.
During three- and four-player games, a player must resolve
strategic actions using both of his chosen strategy cards
before he can pass.
When a player is resolving either the primary or secondary
abilities from a strategy card, he resolves each of the ability’s
effects from top to bottom.
Imperial, Leadership, Politics, Strategy Phase, Technology (Strategy
Card), Trade, Warfare
73
During the strategy phase, each player
chooses a strategy card from the
common play area and places it in his
play area faceup.
TECHNOLOGY
PRIMARY ABILITY:
STRATEGY PHASE
To resolve the strategy phase, players perform the following steps:
73.1
STEP 1— Starting with the speaker and proceeding clockwise,
each player chooses one of the strategy cards from the common
play area and places it faceup in his play area.
STRATEGY CARD
Strategy cards determine initiative order
and provide each player with a powerful
ability that he can use one time during the
action phase.
72.2
• After each player has had an opportunity to resolve a strategy
card’s secondary ability, the active player exhausts his strategy
card so that it is facedown—this indicates that he cannot use
this card again this round and is a reminder that he can now
pass during one of his later turns.
Victory Points
72.1
Each strategy card exists in either the common play area or a
player’s play area.
Players do not have to resolve the secondary abilities of the
active player’s strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Objective Cards, Strategy Card,
72
A strategy card has both a primary ability and a secondary
ability. These abilities are resolved during a strategic action.
7
• If there are one or more trade good tokens on a strategy card
when a player chooses it, he gains those trade goods.
• A player cannot choose a strategy card that another player
has already chosen during the current strategy phase.
• When playing with three or four players, each player
will choose a second strategy card. After the last player
has received his first strategy card, each player chooses
a second strategy card, starting with the speaker and
proceeding clockwise.
✦ Research 1 technology.
✦ Spend 6 resources to research
1 technology.
SECONDARY ABILITY:
73.2
your strategy pool and
4 resources to research
1 technology.
•
Each strategy card has a readied and
an exhausted side.
• The readied side contains the strategy card’s name, initiative
number, and abilities.
• The exhausted side contains the strategy card’s initiative
number.
A player can only resolve the primary ability of his own
strategy cards.
A player can only resolve the secondary ability of strategy
cards that were chosen by other players.
There are eight strategy cards, each of which has a name and an
initiative number.
The initiative number on a player’s strategy card determines the
initiative order for the action phase and status phase.
STEP 2— The speaker places one trade good token from the
supply on each strategy card that was not chosen.
✦ Spend 1 token from
During a four-player game, all strategy cards will be
chosen, and therefore no trade good tokens will be placed
on strategy cards.
Then, players proceed to the action phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Game Round, Speaker, Strategy Card, Trade
Goods
74
STRUCTURES
A structure is a type of unit. PDS units and space docks are
structures.
74.1
Structures are always placed on planets.
•
The Clan of Saar’s “Floating Factory” faction-specific space
dock is placed in a system’s space area.74.2
Structures are primarily placed on planets using the
“Construction” strategy card.
74.3 Structures cannot move or be transported.
74.4 A player can have a maximum of one space dock on each planet.
74.5 A player can have a maximum of two PDS units on each planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Construction, PDS, Units, Space Dock
75
SUPERNOVA
A supernova is an anomaly that affects movement.
75.1
A ship cannot move through or into a supernova.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies, Movement
76
SUSTAIN DAMAGE (UNIT ABILITY)
Some units have the “Sustain Damage” ability. Immediately before
a player assigns damage to his units, he can use the “Sustain
Damage” ability of any of his units in the active system.
76.1
76.2
76.3
76.4
76.6
77.4
77.5
77.6
A damaged unit does not have reduced capabilities and is
functionally the same as an undamaged unit, except that it
cannot use the “Sustain Damage” ability.
78
78.1
78.2
78.3
77.1
77.2
The back of each system tile is colored green, blue, or red.
System tiles with a green-colored back are home systems. Each
home system is unique to one of the game’s factions.
STEP 1—ACTIVATION: The active player must activate a
• To activate a system, the active player places a command
token from his tactic pool on that system. That system is the
active system.
• Other players’ command tokens do not prevent a player
from activating a system.
STEP 2—MOVEMENT: The active player may move any
• Ships that have capacity values can transport ground forces
and fighters when moving.
• The player may choose to not move any ships.
• After the “Move Ships” step, all players can use the “Space
Cannon” abilities of their units in the active system.
STEP 3—SPACE COMBAT: If two players have ships in the
active system, those players must resolve a space combat.
•
78.4
If the active player is the only player with ships in the
system, he skips this step.
STEP 4—INVASION: The active player may use his
“Bombardment” abilities, commit units to land on planets, and
resolve ground combat against other players’ units.
78.5
A system tile represents an area of the galaxy. Players place system
tiles during setup to create the game board.
TACTICAL ACTION
number of ships with a sufficient move value from any number
of systems that do not contain one of his command tokens into
the active system, following the rules for movement.
The “Sustain Damage” ability cannot be used to cancel an
effect that directly destroys a unit.
SYSTEM TILES
Any area on a system tile that is not a planet is space. Ships are
always placed in the space area.
system that does not contain one of his command tokens.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Ground Combat, Space Combat
77
Planets are located in systems. Ground forces and structures are
always placed on planets.
The tactical action is the primary method by which players produce
units, move ships, and extend their dominion within the galaxy. To
perform a tactical action, the active player performs the following steps:
A unit can use its “Sustain Damage” ability any time a hit is
produced against it. This includes hits produced during combat
and from unit abilities such as the “Space Cannon” ability.
The Barony of Letnev’s “Non-Euclidean Shielding” faction
technology allows the Letnev player’s units with the “Sustain
Damage” ability to cancel up to two hits instead of one.
System tiles with a red-colored back are anomalies or are
systems that do not contain planets.
Wormholes
A damaged unit cannot use the “Sustain Damage” ability until
it is repaired during the status phase or by another game effect.
A unit can only use the “Sustain Damage” ability if it
is eligible to be hit. For example, a player cannot use a
dreadnought’s “Sustain Damage” ability to cancel a hit from
“Anti-Fighter Barrage.”
System tiles with a blue-colored back each contain one or more
planets.
RELATED TOPICS: Adjacency, Anomalies, Planets, Ships,
For each “Sustain Damage” ability that a player uses, one hit
produced by another player’s units is canceled. Then, each
unit using this ability is placed on its side to indicate that it is
damaged.
•
76.5
77.3
STEP 5—PRODUCTION: The active player may resolve the
“Production” abilities of his units in the active system.
•
The active player may do this even if he did not move units
or land ground forces during this tactical action.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Active System, Anti-Fighter
Barrage, Bombardment, Command Sheet, Ground Combat,
Invasion, Movement, Producing Units, Transport, Space Cannon,
Space Combat
2579
TECHNOLOGY
79.9
Technology cards allow players to
upgrade units and acquire powerful
abilities.
79.1
79.2
79.3
79.5
79.6
Both the primary and secondary abilities of the “Technology”
strategy card allow a player to research a technology.
79.11
79.12
Any technology cards that a player has not gained remain in
his technology deck. A player can look through his technology
deck at any time.
Players place any unit upgrades they gain faceup on their
faction sheets, covering the unit that shares a name with that
upgrade card.
A player cannot research a faction technology that does not
match his faction.
When researching technology, a player must satisfy each
of a technology’s prerequisites to research it. To satisfy a
technology’s prerequisites, he must own one technology of the
matching color for each prerequisite symbol on the technology
card he wishes to research.
• If an ability instructs a player to gain a technology, he does not
research it; he takes it from his technology deck and places it in
his play area, ignoring prerequisites. Prerequisites symbols are displayed as symbols on the
lower-left corner of the card.
• Unit upgrade technologies do not have a color and do not
satisfy prerequisites.
Some technologies are unit upgrades. Unit upgrades share a
name with a unit that is printed on a player’s faction sheet. • Players may use certain abilities or technology specialties to
ignore some prerequisites.
Players place any unit upgrades they gain faceup on their
faction sheets, covering the unit that shares a name with that
upgrade card.
Each technology that is not a unit upgrade has a colored symbol
displayed in the lower-right corner of the card and on its card
back that indicates that technology’s color.
• A technology’s color has no inherent game effect; however,
each technology a player owns can satisfy a prerequisite of
a matching color when researching other technology.
• Unit upgrades do not have a color and do not satisfy
prerequisites.
• There are four colors of technologies as follows:
Warfare
Propulsion
Cybernetic
Most technology cards have a column of colored symbols
displayed in the lower-left corner of the card. Each symbol in
this column is a prerequisite.
•
26
To research technology, a player gains that technology card
from his technology deck and places it in his play area near his
faction sheet.
•
A player can gain technology cards from his technology deck
by researching technology.
Biotic
79.8
79.10
A player does not own the technology cards in his
technology deck.
•
79.7
You may exhaust this card before 1 or
more of your units use SPACE CANNON ;
hits produced by those units must be
assigned to non-fighter ships if able.
Each player places any
technologies he has gained faceup
near his faction sheet. He owns
those cards for the duration of the
game and can use their abilities.
•
79.4
GRAVITON LASER SYSTEM
RESEARCHING TECHNOLOGY
A player can research technology by resolving either the primary
or secondary ability of the “Technology” strategy card during the
action phase. Other game effects may also instruct a player to
research technology.
A technology card’s prerequisites indicate the number and
color of technologies a player must own to research that
technology card.
79.13
TECHNOLOGY SPECIALTIES
A technology specialty is a technology symbol found on some planets.
79.14
79.15
When researching technology, a player can exhaust a planet
he controls that has a technology specialty to ignore one
prerequisite symbol of the matching type on the technology
card he is researching.
If the planet card is already exhausted, it cannot be used to
ignore a prerequisite.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Exhausted, Initiative Order,
Resources, Strategic Action, Strategy Card, Technology (Strategy
Card), Unit Upgrades80
TECHNOLOGY (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Technology” strategy card allows players to research new
technology. This card’s initiative value is “7.”
80.1
80.2
80.3
During the action phase, if the active player has the
“Technology” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to
resolve that card’s primary ability.
To resolve the primary ability on the “Technology” strategy
card, the active player can research one technology of his
choice. Then, he may spend six resources to research one
additional technology of his choice.
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Technology” strategy card, each other player, beginning
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding
clockwise, may spend one command token from his strategy
pool and four resources to research one technology of his choice.
82
A trade good represents a player’s buying and
trading power beyond his planet’s raw resources.
82.1
82.2
The “Trade” strategy card allows players to gain trade goods and
replenish commodities. This card’s initiative value is “5.”
81.1
82.4 A player can spend a trade good in one of the following ways:
STEP 1— The active player gains 3 trade goods.
81.3 STEP 2— The active player replenishes his commodities by
taking the number of commodity tokens necessary so that he
has an amount equal to the commodity value on his faction
sheet. Then, he places those tokens in the commodity area of
his faction sheet.
•
81.4
82.5
82.6
During the action phase, if the active player has the “Trade”
strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to resolve that
card’s primary ability. To resolve the primary ability on the
“Trade” strategy card, the active player resolves the following
effects in order:
81.2
When a player gains a trade good, he takes a
trade good token from the supply and places it on the trade
good area on his command sheet, making sure the trade good
side is faceup.
A player can spend trade goods at any time during the game.
Strategy Card, Technology
TRADE (STRATEGY CARD)
Trade goods and commodities are represented
by opposite sides of the same token.
82.3
RELATED TOPICS: Initiative Order, Resources, Strategic Action,
81
TRADE GOODS
• In place of spending one resource.
• In place of spending one influence. However, trade goods
cannot be spent to cast votes during the agenda phase.
• To resolve an effect that specifically requires that a trade
good be spent.
A player can exchange his trade goods with other players
during a transaction.
When a player receives a commodity token from another
player, the player who received that token places it in his trade
good area with the trade good side of the token faceup.
•
82.7
That token is no longer a commodity token; it is a trade
good token.
Trade good tokens come in values of one and three. A player
can swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS: Commodities, Deals, Influence, Resources,
Transactions
A player cannot have more commodities than the
commodity value printed on his faction sheet.
STEP 3— The active player chooses any number of other
players. Those players use the secondary ability of this card
without spending a command token.
81.5
• The chosen players must use the secondary ability.
• The chosen players can only use the secondary ability once,
and they cannot use it by spending command tokens.
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Trade” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise,
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to
replenish his commodities.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Commodities, Initiative
Order, Strategic Action, Strategy Card, Trade Goods
2783
TRANSACTIONS
A transaction is a way for a player to exchange commodities, trade
goods, and promissory notes.
83.1
During the active player’s turn, he may resolve up to one
transaction with each of his neighbors.
•
83.2
83.3
84.2
Players can exchange commodities, trade goods and promissory
notes, but cannot exchange other types of cards or tokens. 84.3
•
83.5
83.6
84.1
A player can resolve a transaction at any time during his
turn, even during a combat.
The players agree on the terms of the transaction before
exchanging any components. After the components are
traded, the transaction cannot be undone.
Players can resolve a transaction as part of a deal.
During each “Vote” step of the agenda phase, a player may
perform one transaction with each other player, even if those
players are not his neighbors.
The ship can pick up and transport fighters and ground forces
when it moves. During a tactical action, it can pick up and
transport units from the active system, the system it started its
movement in, and each system it moves through.
•
The Emirates of Hacan can also exchange action cards with
other players as part a transactions.
A transaction does not have to be even. A player may exchange
components of unequal value or give components without
receiving something in return.
TRANSPORT
When a ship moves, it may transport any combination of fighters
and ground forces, but the number of units it transports cannot
exceed that ship’s capacity value.
To resolve a transaction, a player gives any number of trade
goods and commodities and up to one promissory note to
a neighbor in exchange for any number of trade goods and
commodities and up to one promissory note.
•
83.4
84
84.4
These transported units can only be dropped off in the
active system.
Any fighters and ground forces that a ship transports must
move with the ship and remain in the space area of a system.
Fighters and ground forces cannot be picked up from a system
that contains one of their faction’s command tokens other than
the active system.
A player can land ground forces on a planet in a system during
the “Invasion” step of a tactical action.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Invasion, Movement, Tactical Action
85
UNITS
A unit is represented by a plastic figure.
85.1
85.2
RELATED TOPICS: Commodities, Deals, Neighbors, Promissory
Notes, Trade Goods
85.3
There are three types of units: ships, ground forces, and
structures.
Each color of plastic comes with the following units:
• 3 Space Docks • 12 Infantry
• 6 PDS units • 10 Fighters
• 8 Destroyers • 4 Carriers
• 8 Cruisers • 5 Dreadnoughts
• 2 War Suns • 1 Flagship
Units exist either on the game board or in a player’s
reinforcements.
RELATED TOPICS: Ground Forces, Ships, Structures
2886
UNIT UPGRADES
87.7
A unit upgrade is a type of technology card.
86.1
Unit upgrades share a name with a unit that is printed on a
player’s faction sheet, but have a higher roman numeral. For
example, a player’s “Carrier I” unit is upgraded by the unit
upgrade technology “Carrier II.”
•
86.2
86.3
86.4
The Nekro Virus faction may upgrade his units with units of
the same type, (for example, “dreadnought” or “infantry”)
even if their names do not match. If the Nekro Virus gains
a unit upgrade technology of the same unit type of a unit
upgrade technology he already has, the previous upgrade is
overwritten, and he must use the same Valefar Assimilator
token as was used to copy the previous upgrade.
Players place unit upgrades they gain faceup on their faction
sheets, covering the unit that shares a name with that upgrade card.
The white arrows next to an attribute on a faction sheet indicate
that the attribute will improve when the unit is upgraded.
After a player gains a unit upgrade card, each of that player’s
units that correspond to that upgrade card is treated as having
the attributes and abilities printed on that upgrade card. Any
previous attributes of that unit, such as the one printed on that
player’s faction sheet, are ignored.
RELATED TOPICS: Technology
87
87.8
87.2
88
To resolve the primary ability on the “Warfare” strategy card, the
active player performs the following steps:
88.1
87.3
87.4
Each player places one of his control tokens on space “0” of the
victory point track during setup.
When a player gains a victory point, he advances his control
token a number of spaces along the victory point track equal to
the number of victory points he gained.
•
87.5
87.6
If the players are using the 14-space side of the victory
point track, the game ends and a player wins when he has
14 victory points instead of 10.
A player’s control token must always be on the space of the
victory point track that shows a number that matches the
number of victory points he has gained during the game. A
player cannot have more than 10 victory points.
If an ability refers to the player with the “most” or “fewest”
victory points, and more than one player is tied in that respect,
the effect applies to all of the tied players.
If a player gains a victory point from a law, and that law is
discarded, he does not lose that victory point.
STEP 1— The active player removes any one of his command
tokens from the game board. Then, he gains that command
token by placing it in one of the pools of his command sheet.
88.2
STEP 2— The active player can redistribute the command
tokens among the pools on his command sheet.
88.3
Players gain victory points in a variety of ways. A common way
that a player can gain victory points is by scoring objectives.
•
WARFARE (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Warfare” strategy card allows a player to remove a command
token from the board and redistribute the command tokens in his
command pools. This card’s initiative value is “6.” During the
action phase, if the active player has the “Warfare” strategy card, he
can perform a strategic action to resolve that card’s primary ability.
VICTORY POINTS
Each player uses the victory point track to indicate how many
victory points he has gained.
If the game ends because the speaker cannot reveal an objective
card, the player with the most victory points is the winner. If
one or more players are tied for having the most victory points,
the tied player who is first in initiative order is the winner.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Imperial, Objective Cards
The first player to gain 10 victory points wins the game.
87.1
The game ends as soon as one player has 10 victory points. If
two players would gain 10 victory points during the same status
phase, the player who is earlier in initiative order is the winner,
because he has the opportunity to score objectives first.
After the active player resolves the primary ability of the
“Warfare” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise,
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to
resolve the “Production” ability of one unit in his home system.
•
The command token is not placed in his home system.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Command Tokens, Initiative
Order, Strategy Card, Strategic Action
89
WORMHOLES
Some systems contain wormholes. Systems that contain identical
wormholes are adjacent.
89.1
89.2
89.3
89.4
There are two basic types of wormholes: alpha and beta.
PDS units that have been upgraded by the “PDS II—Deep
Space Cannon” unit upgrade technology can use their “Space
Cannon” abilities through wormholes.
Players can be neighbors and perform transactions through
wormholes.
There is one advanced type of wormhole: delta. This wormhole
follows all normal wormhole rules.
•
This wormhole is present on the Creuss Gate system tile
and the Ghosts of Creuss home system tile.
RELATED TOPICS: Adjacency, Movement, Neighbors, System Tiles